---
layout: post
title:  "Cloud Age technology and Iron Age processes"
date:   2017-12-14 07:01:02
categories: book
published: false
---

Most organizations who rely on digital technology are at some stage of adopting what can be considered "Cloud Age" infrastructure technology - public and/or private cloud, container orchestration, infrastructure automation, serverless, etc. The underlying driver for this is to become faster at implementing technology changes, in order to become faster at responding to market challenges and opportunities.

But organizations who have existing IT capabilities have a serious challenge when it comes to putting these technologies into practice and actually seeing those benefits. The challenge is that they have already entrenched ways of using and managing technology which prevent the organization from making the continuous, rapid changes to their systems, even with the newer technology. The processes these organizations use are designed for "Iron Age" technology.

The result is Cloud Age technology being used in an Iron Age operating framework.

## Six weeks for a cloud server?

For example, a common scenario I've seen at several retailers and financial institutions is internal, private clouds being rolled out. The technology department will proudly boast that, with their newly automated processes, they are able to provision a new virtual server within minutes, whereas it previously took several days. However, when I talk to the users of these servers - application teams - they report that it still takes several weeks (six weeks seems to be a common figure, for some reason) for them to be given access to a new VM after they request it.

The difference is in the processes that need to be followed for delivering a virtual machine. The request needs to be approved, perhaps requiring review of the business case, budget, etc. The IT department requires a fair bit of information about how to configure the server. How much RAM, disk space, CPU, etc needs to be allocated? What software packages need to be installed? Which users will need access to log into it? What networking rules needs to be configured to route traffic and access to it?

Actually spinning up a new virtual machine on the internal cloud takes an engineer a few minutes of effort. However, additional work is needed to install those software packages, configure the networking, add user accounts, etc. In many cases, this work is spread across different teams (OS team, networking team, security team, etc.)

There may then need to be additional reviews, inspections, audits, and signoffs required before the keys to this shiny new virtual machine can be handed over to the people who need to use it.

This is a classic case of optimizing one part of a long process, and being surprised that the overall process doesn't seem any faster - or less prone to human error - than it was before.

## Speed and quality

There is often a feeling that moving quickly involves sacrificing quality. We have a six week process of carefully planning, designing, testing, and reviewing a change. Surely if we want to carry this out in a matter of minutes (and allow users to do it for themselves!) this means the outcome will be shoddy?

The reality is quite different. For one thing, I've often observed that organizations with long, complex change processes often suffer from poor quality systems. The more people and steps who are involved in a process, the more opportunity there is for miscommunication, lost context, and diffusion of responsibility. Each person carries out one small activity, without ownership or often even understanding of the goal of the overall activity.

It turns out that organizations which are very good at IT manage to combine both speed and quality. The State of the DevOps Report shows that "high performing" organizations make changes more often (insert specifics), and with a higher success rate (more specifics), than those which have slower change processes.

Although at first this seems counter-intuitive, it makes sense. A fast, frequent pace of change can only be done by teams who are very good at making changes. Pumping shoddy work into an IT system quickly creates a messy system that is impossible to change quickly. This can be seen in many organizations where seemingly simple changes are surprisingly difficult to make. Releases are disruptive and often fail.

High performing IT teams work in very different ways to those who try to follow "best practice" in change management. They use vastly simpler working processes and practices, but follow them with much more rigour. And they leverage their tooling, not just to implement changes quickly, but to ensure the reliability of changes with a minimum of ceremony.

## Cloud Age process

The trick is that the same tools which rapidly implement changes to infrastructure can be used to rapidly and reliably ensure the quality and reliability of those changes. 

allow changes to infrastructure to be implemented quickly can also be used to ensure that 


## Cost of change



