---
layout: post
title:  "GitOps"
date:   2023-08-16 09:09:00
categories: book
published: false
---

TL;DR:
GitOps is a technique for deploying applications. When you peel away the hype (of which there's a lot), it's a useful technique that takes advantage of the functionality of a Kubernetes cluster, and creates opportunities to separate concerns between configuring an application and the implementation of the deployment process.
Lately I've seen Thoughtworks teams actually choosing to implement GitOps, which makes me think it's time to reconsider it.
Is it too complex to blip?
I think the complexity comes purely from vendors hyping it into a whole new way of life. I don't believe the complexity is inherent in what people actually do.
What about the branching?
The thing that is put into source control and used to deploy is not the application code (which is normally in immutable containers), it's configuration for the application deployment - Helm chart or some other descriptor. Using PRs to manage changes (e.g. new container version to deploy) is not the only way (hell, you could put it in an S3 bucket folders rather than git branches). And using PRs for configuration is probably less harmful than using PRs for code.
A simple definition of GitOps
GitOps is a technique for deploying applications using a control loop. A descriptor that defines the configuration for an application deployment is maintained at a known location, usually a branch or folder in a git repository. The control loop continuously validates whether the deployed application and its configuration matches the current version of the descriptor. If either the descriptor or the application changes, the controller reapplies the current descriptor.
See also Kubernetes Operators | Technology Radar | Thoughtworks
What's useful about GitOps
It leverages Kubernetes platform functionality for application deployment (operators and the control loop pattern)
It automatically keeps the application correctly configured, automatically preventing or correcting out of band changes
The logic for application deployment is integrated into the Kubernetes cluster, which makes it available for multiple applications (handy to standardize deployment of large fleets of microservices, for example).
It separates the concern of defining how an application is configured from the deployment.
This can help by limiting permissions needed - a developer can change the version of their application, or its configuration, without needing permissions to deploy the application
Logic can be included into the deployment process for things like testing and governance
What's over-hyped or mis-hyped about GitOps
GitOps is not an implementation of Continuous Delivery
The most visible "GitOps" products include "CD" in their name (FluxCD, ArgoCD)
GitOps is a technique that applies to how an instance of an application is deployed.
GitOps does not provide any way to validate and progress changes through a path to production.
GitOps is not an alternative to Continuous Delivery
Some GitOps proponents have criticized the typical "push" based deployment used in many pipelines (e.g. pipeline stage runs a deployment command to upload and run an application package to a server)
This mis-characterizes CD as being simply an application deployment mechanism.
(Both of these characterize Continuous Delivery as only an application deployment mechanism)
Rather than CD being an approrach to delivering code into production, including everything needed to validate its readiness for production use.
GitOps an all-encompassing new paradigm for computing
Not all applications run on Kubernetes
Failure to be a containerized / Kubernetes application is not failure






GitOps as a buzzword:

* I see GitOps as a variant of Infrastructure as Code, much as Scrum, Kanban, and XP are variants of Agile. "Immutable infrastructure" is another variant, as is the "infrastructure as software" approach that Pulumi is advocating (and which is fundamentally different from the CDK approach, but that's another topic). There's an as-yet-unnamed variant that many of us at TW tend to use which emphasizes the use of pipelines to deliver infra code across environments. As with Agile variants, these are not necessarily exclusive, so you could use pipelines to promote code across environments, and apply them using GitOps practices.

* Unlike some folks, I don't have an issue with someone coining a term for a set of practices that they didn't invent. I've heard the same thing said of "DevOps", among other buzzwords. It can be valuable to raise the profile of practices that aren't widely enough understood or used.

* Is WeaveWorks using GitOps as a buzzword to market their products? Definitely. At the same time, they're opening it by supporting the CNCF in defining it as a standard, and there are other products and vendors riding the GitOps wave as well.

GitOps as a practice:

* The current CNCF draft definition of GitOps is pretty straightforward. Essentially, 1) define your infrastructure using declarative code, 2) version the code, 3) continuously apply code to instances, and 4) only use declarations for operational tasks.

* Of those 4 principles:

  1) Define your infrastructure using declarative code: A perfectly valid option, although it's a contrast with the Pulumi approach (but is arguably compatible with the CDK approach, since CDK generates declarative code).

  2) Version your infrastructure code: Obviously. It'd be a stretch to say you're doing Infra as Code otherwise.

  3) Continuously apply code to instances: This is the principle I find most valuable to emphasize, whether you're "doing GitOps" or not. It's the one that many teams we encounter "doing GitOps" don't actually do, because it requires the most dramatic shift from traditional sysadmin work.

  4) Only use declarations for operational tasks: I'm least sure about this one. It may be fine in limited contexts, and given that GitOps tends to be used with Kubernetes, maybe it makes sense. Certainly good to encourage people to move towards idempotent operations, and away from ad-hoc scripting and interactive operations. So I like the aspiration, but maybe I'm struggling to make the leap of faith out of my comfort zone.

The GitOps gap:

A minor gap is that GitOps is typically specified for use to configure applications on an existing Kubernetes cluster. Using it to provision the cluster, and other, less "cloud native" infrastructure contexts, such as Terraform, CloudFormation, and other projects, may stretch it. Although to be fair, the challenges with these projects occur with any other method as well, since these projects tend to become large and brittle. So I see dealing with this (through better design of decoupled stacks) as orthogonal to GitOps.

The big gap is that the CNCF definition of GitOps describes how to use code to manage a single instance of infrastructure. It doesn't say anything about how to use infrastructure code to manage multiple consistent instances of infrastructure. When it talks about "consistency", and even "delivering code", it specifically means consistency and delivery of code for one instance to that instance.

So how do you define multiple environments in a path to production - dev, test, staging, production, for example? Or how do you provision multiple instances across regions or white-label clients?

In the IaC book, I describe several patterns for this, one of which is the "Copy-Paste Environment Antipattern". This involves having a separate code project for each environment. When you make a change to one environment, you copy it to the others if you want them to be consistent. In practice, people using this antipattern fall into multiple bad habits. These include having hard-coded differences in the code for each environment ("don't forget to search and replace the string 'staging' with 'production' when you copy the code across, and change the cluster size!"). Some differences stay for a long time ("we still have those changes in staging we haven't finished yet, make sure not to copy them into production when you copy your bugfix"). Essentially, this is the same snowflake environment approach, implemented as code.

GitOps doesn't inherently promote copy-paste environments, but it makes them the path of least resistance. Whether people use branches or folders to maintain separate copies of code per environment, the result is the same. Keeping the code for each environment instance in git means the code is mutable, rather than treating it as an immutable artefact. It's the infrastructure equivalent of recompiling a Java project and building a separate deployable artefact for each environment - it's a bad habit.

Conclusions

So is GitOps a bad idea? I'm not sure I would go that far. In practice, I think GitOps is generally fine for configuring infrastructure that has already been provisioned, and for configuring applications - in other words, the way it tends to be used with Kubernetes.

Rather than completely discouraging GitOps, it may be worth calling out more specifically how I think it shouldn't be used. 

I strongly encourage people to reuse infrastructure code, without modification, between environments that should be consistent. Use parameters to make variations explicit and safe. I recommend that infrastructure code not be mutable between instances.

GitOps doesn't explicitly contradict this. Adhering to the principle of "continuous state reconciliation" can discourage mutating code, because it gives less opportunity to make changes to code when copying it to a new instance than manually running apply after copying or merging code. But keeping code in a mutable state (i.e. in  git) across instances makes it easy to fall into bad habits that many people find natural and routine.

So what I'd tend to recommend is that, when using GitOps for infrastructure code (as opposed to more simple application configuration), code should be promoted across instances using mechanisms that prevent it being modified. Use scripted pipeline stages to copy or merge code from one instance to the next.

K
