---
layout: post
title:  ""
date:   2099-01-01 16:20:20
image:  
image_alt:  
categories: book
published: false
---

When I was in university, we created the newspaper and other periodicals by cutting pieces of paper with exacto blades and pasting them onto a board. We then took them to a printer, which at the time was a type of business that employed skilled tradespeople to turn what we gave them into large runs of printed material, as opposed to a piece of plastic that sits next to my desk at home and consumes over-priced ink.

I briefly interned at an advertising agency, where interns and grads created print ads the same way. Obviously the senior people designed the ads, but we did the hands-on work of assembling their ideas and making them ready for the printer. I didn't do well at that job, as they had more exacting standards for making borders and other lines super-straight - you had a little roll of thin black tape that you laid down, and it took a steady hand and patience that I lacked.

We started using a Macintosh with PageMaker and a laser printer, which made the work easier, although we still took it to the printshop. As more people got access to this kind of setup, more people created newsletters, flyers, and all sorts of stuff that they never would have done if it meant learning how to do pasteup. You could choose from all kinds of fonts and colours and create unholy atrocities. I recall a sales person at a computer shop I worked at later making a flyer with text in all italics, because he reckoned it would get peoples' attention.

So desktop publishing opened this kind of stuff up to a far broader audience. It didn't give them taste or design skills, but I have no doubt that many young folks with the talent and interest were able to develop their interest, who never would have before.
